Mastering SQL: The SELECT and WHERE Clauses Demystified


The SELECT Clause
The SELECT clause is the backbone of SQL queries. It is used to specify the columns you want to retrieve
from a database table. A basic SELECT statement looks like this:

    SELECT column1, column2, ...
FROM table_name;

SELECT: This keyword is used to indicate that you want to retrieve data from the database.

column1, column2, ...: These are the names of the columns you want to include in the result set.
 You can specify one or more columns, separated by commas.

FROM table_name: This part of the query specifies the table from which you want to retrieve data.

Example:
Suppose you have a table named students with columns student_id, first_name, last_name, and age.
You can use the SELECT clause to retrieve the first and last names of all students:

    SELECT first_name, last_name
FROM students;

The WHERE Clause
While the SELECT clause helps you choose which columns to retrieve, the WHERE clause allows you to filter
the rows you want to include in the result set based on specified conditions. A basic WHERE clause is added
to the SELECT statement as follows:

    SELECT column1, column2, ...
FROM table_name
WHERE condition;

WHERE condition: This part of the query defines the condition that each row must meet to be included in the
result set. Rows that don't meet this condition are excluded.

Example:
Suppose you want to retrieve the first and last names of students who are older than 20 years.
You can use the WHERE clause to filter the rows based on the age:

    SELECT first_name, last_name
FROM students
WHERE age > 20;

Combining SELECT and WHERE
To harness the full power of SQL queries, you often combine the SELECT and WHERE clauses.
This allows you to not only choose which columns to retrieve but also filter the rows based on specific criteria.

Example:
Let's say you want to retrieve the first and last names of students who are older than 20 years and have a
last name starting with 'S'. You can achieve this by combining the SELECT and WHERE clauses:

    SELECT first_name, last_name
FROM students
WHERE age > 20
  AND last_name LIKE 'S%';

In this query:

We use the SELECT clause to specify that we want to retrieve the first_name and last_name columns.

The WHERE clause filters the rows based on two conditions:

age > 20: Selects students older than 20.

last_name LIKE 'S%': Selects students with last names starting with 'S'.

